[Music]
hello everyone blind dweller here and
welcome to the third and final episode
of the shocking life and performance art
of Marina Abramovich apologies that has
taken a while to continue this series
for those who don't know I needed to
take a break for a while because I had
other videos that I wanted to release
before the end of 2023 and there's a lot
of research that has gone into this
series so far and the last thing I
wanted to do was burn myself out or end
up rushing a documentary but now it's a
new year I'm fresh and ready to go and
looking forward to returning to taking a
deep look at this very unique and
controversial artist in the last episode
we looked at her first ever performances
including the infamous piece titled
Rhythm zero that a lot of people regard
as a most controversial and well-known
performance if you haven't seen that
episode yet please make sure you do so
by the way in this episode we're going
to be taking a look at an interesting
shift in her work where her performances
began to explore much broader and deeper
Concepts some even verging on the
spiritual starting with a significant
period in her life where she would meet
a vital character who would briefly
become her lover and artistic soulmate
named Frank U lysen or as is more widely
known Uli we've got a lot to uncover for
this Final Chapter so please make
yourself comfortable or I guess since
we're looking at Marina Abramovich
please make yourself uncomfortable and
please don't forget to subscribe and hit
the notification Bell to catch up with
more videos from me on the weird and
wonderful side of the art World welcome
to another video everyone this is the
final installment of the shocking life
and performance art of Marina
[Music]
Abramovich
in the summer of
1975 following the buzz and uproar that
rippled across the art world with rhythm
zero Marina Abramovich was invited to
Vienna in Austria to perform pieces that
were arguably much darker and much more
graphic than anything she had performed
before yet strangely there isn't much
information on these pieces except for
what Marina herself writes about in her
biography walk through walls in the book
she details a rather Grim performance
that she was involved in conducted by
another controversial conceptual artist
named Herman Niche who was predominantly
Infamous for creating dark and violent
spectacles that often use nude
performers and real blood with an axe
that replicated Unholy and sacrificial
rituals the performance Marina took part
in would be no different quote that
summer Niche staged a performance in a
castle outside Vienna called pritz
andorf the piece was to last 24 hours
there were 60 participants including me
most of the others were men some were
naked some were dressed all in white I
was placed on a wooden stretcher naked
and
blindfolded and the stretcher was leaned
against a concrete wall as gloomy music
played Niche poured sheep blood and
organs eyes and liver over my belly and
between my legs things got stranger from
there after this had gone on for 12
hours I took off my blindfold and walked
away not that I couldn't take it
physically I just didn't want to be part
of it anymore I understood it was not my
thing it was the enormous amount of
animals blood and the fact that we had
to drink it and that it all all took
place in a chapel in the castle it felt
like a kind of black mass or banel it
seemed so negative to me but at bottom
it just was not my story not
conceptually or in any other way end
quote following this Marina chose to
stay in Vienna where she would meet a
Swiss artist named Thomas lips who she
had a brief relationship with mixed with
the profoundly horrific effect of the
Herman Niche performance and the brief
fling with Thomas lips Abramovich then
became inspired to conceptualize her
next performance in Vienna where she
would subsequently give the title Thomas
lips or the lips of Thomas this
performance again would have limited
information surrounding it compared to
our other work with only a few
photographs and video clips of the piece
still existing today the most well-known
photograph being that of a five-pointed
star that Marina would carve onto a
stomach Marina would detail the
performance in her biography as
follows I slowly eat 1 kilo of Honey
with a silver spoon I slowly drink one
liter of red wine out of a crystal glass
I break the glass with my right hand I
cut a five-pointed star on my stomach
with a razor blade I violently whip
myself until I no longer feel any pain I
lie down on a cross made of ice
blocks the heat of a suspended heater
pointed at my stomach causes the cut
star to bleed and the rest of my body
behind to
freeze I remain on the ice cross for 30
minutes until the public interrupts the
piece by removing the ice blocks from
underneath me duration 2 hours end
quote although the spectators according
to ramovic were familiar with provoc Ive
art and performances this particular
piece proved to even be too much for
them after some Spectators rushed to the
stage to cover Marina in coats and help
her off the ice she then had to be taken
to the hospital not for her wounds from
the Whip or the self-inflicted Stars she
cut onto her stomach but for her right
hand that she had unintentionally gouged
when she broke the wine glass that would
need a great deal of
stitches towards the end of night 1975
on Marina's 29th birthday she received
an invitation to take part in a new
upcoming performance this time in a
gallery in Amsterdam known as the Apple
for the Dutch TV show called build
spruck in early December Abramovich
arrived in Amsterdam to meet the Creator
at the airport who was accompanied by
another individual a German artist who
went by the name of Uli who was to be
Marina's guide and assistant for a
performance
at that moment Marina seemed to be
instantly enthralled by him quote Uli
his real name I found out was Frank U
lysen but he never used it was in his
early 30s tall and skinny with long
flowing hair that he tied up in the back
with a pair of Chopsticks a fact that
was immediately interesting to me
because I did my hair the exact same way
but the other interesting thing was was
that the two halves of his face were
different the left side was shaved
smooth and powdered with a plucked
eyebrow and light Rouge on his lips the
right side was stubbly and a little
greasy with a normal eyebrow and no
makeup if you saw either side in profile
you would get a completely different
impression masculine on one side
feminine on the other end
quote as she spent time with him in
Amsterdam they would discover quite
surprising similarities to each other
the biggest coincidence being that they
shared the same birthday of November
30th as time went on they spent more
time with each other and began to form
an incredibly passionate romantic
relationship but this ultimately would
only be the beginning of a partnership
that would change both of their lives
quite
significantly
[Music]
falling deeply in love with Uli a man
who she truly felt was destined for her
made leaving Amsterdam to once again
return to Belgrade all the more
difficult not to mention that she was
still married to Nesha palovich and
living with her mother it was a
relationship riddled with forbidden
desire and one that would have to be
kept secret for a long time on top of
this she was also forced to resign from
her teaching job due to the emerging
pictures of her Rhythm performances that
would cause a scandal at this stage
Abramovich was left with little choice
but to plan her escape from Belgrade for
good and to live with Uli she packed
light only taking a handful of
belongings with the majority of her
things only being a portfolio of her
work and she secretly left on a train to
Amsterdam not once Looking Back by 1976
not long after Marina's final departure
from Belgrade she and Nesha eventually
divorced not long after moving in
together Marina and Uli realizing more
and more how their perceptions of art
were merged into one with their similar
personalities traits and artistic
backgrounds they began planning
performance art projects together
inspiration for their first ever
collaborative performance Mormons came
from an unlikely item in their
possession a Newton's Cradle Uli for one
was absolutely fascinated in the motion
of it and the illusion of the bull
bearings essentially transferring energy
and movement to each other therefore the
idea came to them both to do the same to
collide into each other and to merge
their energy into one although the
movements would not be as clean or
precise as a Newton's Cradle Uli and
Marina both recognized the beauty in
that a rawness that could be
encapsulated by the project and thus the
performance known as relation in space
was
conceptualized quote the idea of this
piece was two naked bodies running and
hitting each other frontally and
increasing the speed for one hour we
really wanted to have this male and
female energy put together and create
something we called that self it was
very important to to collaborate and to
mix our ideas together and not ever say
to anybody from whom the idea comes from
it was the mixture that really made
sense to us and created that kind of
third energy field end
quote the performance took place for the
annual Venice BN art event in a
warehouse on the island of gueda in
Venice Italy in front of a few hundred
Spectators microphones were apparently
metic ully positioned in order to
capture the sound of their increasingly
intense collisions which at some stages
would send Marina collapsing to the
floor the idea as a whole was to perform
something that was as minimalist as
possible and according to Abramovich
nothing could be more minimal than two
naked bodies in any empty space and with
the only sound being emitted would be
two bodies slamming into each other as
for the reaction of the audience as well
as their interpretation it was clear
that they could sense Marina and Uli
were in love but this added more mystery
to their somewhat aggressive performance
just who were they exactly why were they
colliding and was there some kind of
hostility in their relationship being
released in this bizarre display these
sorts of questions being projected from
the audience much like many of Marina's
projects up till now was the final
ingredient to complete the artwork
[Music]
following relation in space Marina and
Uli would make an ambitious decision
they decided they would leave the city
of Amsterdam behind and give up most if
not all of their possessions to
completely focus on their performance
art together they purchased a corrugated
iron van which Uli painted black and
they would spend 3 years living and
traveling in it devoting themselves
completely to a nomadic lifestyle free
from all attachments and utterly
dedicated to traveling to multiple
places to perform their projects Marina
would look back on this particular time
of her career as being one of the
happiest periods of her life during
1977 Uli and Marina materialized many
interesting Concepts all of which would
have virtually no rehearsals nor any
particular end goal all that was planned
would be the idea itself and the place
and time to perform it one of which
would be the piece titled relation and
movement this involved the pair driving
their van inside of a museum for 365
laps a black liquid oozed from the car
forming a perfect circle the idea was
that each lap represented a year and
after 365 laps they quote entered the
New
Millennium another piece titled relation
in time they set back to back tied
together by their ponytails for a total
of 16 hours as time went on their hair
would eventually come apart strand by
strand they allowed the public to enter
the room to see if they could use the
energy of a public to push their limits
even further another well-known piece
titled breathing in breathing out was a
particularly surreal yet very simple
performance had garnered wide attention
in this fuo locked their mouths together
and basically inhaled each other's
exhalations until they had used up all
the available oxygen quote we stuck
cigarette filters in our nostrils to
block the air and we taped little
microphones to our throats we kneeled
down facing each other I blew all the
air out of my lungs and Uli breathed in
all the air he could then we clamped our
mouths together and he blew his air into
my mouth then I blew the air back to him
as our mouths stayed fixed together as
the sound of our breathing and then our
gasping was Amplified we exchanged again
and again that one lungful of air which
became less and less oxygen and more and
more carbon dioxide as it was exhaled
time after time after 19 minutes there
was no oxygen left we stopped just
before losing
Consciousness end
quote it would also be during 1977 that
one of Marina abramovic's trademark
performances would first be
conceptualized the piece titled
imponderabilia where Uli and Marina both
completely nuded would stand in a narrow
doorway and in order for the public to
pass to another section of the
exhibition they must squeeze sideways
between them and in doing so choose
which one of them to
face many other performance artists as
the years went by would recreate this
concept to Marina Abramovich
retrospectives I've actually personally
witnessed this myself and what I always
find so interesting is seeing which one
of the two performers a member of a
public chooses to face towards when
passing through the pattern that I
personally began to notice quite often
is normally a woman chose to face for
naked female performer and a man chose
to face the male performer as to why
this is I'm not quite sure perhaps
Society is conditioned people when in
these types of situations to have more
trust in their own gender or that they
feel that to face the naked member of
the opposite sex could be disrespectful
or perverse in some way either way I
thought it was was fascinating to
witness light dark was a performance
that again was creatively simple yet
surreal in
execution Uli and Marina would kneel
opposite each other and begin the
performance by slowly slapping each
other in the face much like relation in
space it began slowly but increased in
Pace as time went on Uli turns his cheek
towards Abramovich when she swipes at
him whereas Abramovich turns her face
away the performance ends when
Abramovich Ducks her head evading the
next slap according to Uli light dark
was supposed to express the relationship
between man and woman as he explains
quote we expressed the various aspects
between men and women the work wasn't
only about ourselves our relationship
made the work possible but the
performances were not a direct image of
our private relationship ship end quote
Marina too would comment on the piece
saying quote it is not the pain itself
that matters we never did things for the
pleasure of pain we were looking for a
key a way to break through the body to
open something up which is a desire that
comes from Another Side Of Truth or
reality end
quote in the following year of
1978 Uli and Marina conceptualized a
bizarre performance known as um ah ah I
guess let's just go with that here they
stood opposite each other and made long
sounds with their mouths open gradually
they would move closer and closer to one
another until eventually they would yell
directly into each other's open
[Music]
mouths
oh the performance would last 15 minutes
by the time both artists voices would
end up out of sink and failing from a
continuous yelling the purpose of his
piece was to demonstrate their interest
in endurance and duration as well as
exploring aggression between physically
present figures one male and one female
not too dissimilar from a concept of the
light dark
performance but one project a
performance art by Marina and Uli from a
certain point of view would be a call
back to a much earlier performance of
marinas her Infamous Rhythm Zero
Performance back in Italy was without a
doubt an experiment of surrendering
complete and utter trust to the audience
in order to complete the artwork but
when it came to the 1980 performance of
rest energy this time she would offer
her trust and vulnerability entirely to
her lover Uli although only lasting 4
minutes Marina would look back on this
performance as one of the hardest pieces
she's ever had to do quote I was not in
charge in rest energy we actually held
an arrow on the weight of our bodies and
the arrow was pointed right into my
heart we had two small microphones near
our hearts so we could hear our
heartbeats as our performance was
progressing heartbeats were becoming
more and more intense and though it
lasted Just 4 minutes and 10 seconds I'm
telling you for me it was forever it was
a performance about complete and total
trust end
quote
whether audiences loathed or admired
them Marina and Uli seemed to have been
successful in their goal to bring
something new and unexpected to the art
World their ambition to let go of their
individual egos to instead merge
together to manifest one creative
personality was accomplished and sitting
on the summit of a performance art scene
but as the years went by a pattern was
beginning to form for whatever reason in
spite of their admirable ability to work
seamlessly as a Duo the attention of the
audience was gradually beginning to
shift focus more towards Marina than Uli
when the media press and art magazines
would talk about their performances most
would mention Abramovich first and in
some cases they would leave out Uli alog
together talking only of Marina or
mistaking oui to be her assistant rather
than her counterpart in the
performances regardless the couple
Contin to perform together throughout
the 1980s the most well-known work
during this period would be a series of
22 performances that took place between
1981 and
1987 in 19 locations across a number of
continents titled night sea Crossing
during the performances Uli and
Abramovich sat completely still and in
silence at either end of a table facing
each other in relation to this project
would be the work displayed beside it
known as conjunction which was deeply
inspired by Marina's growing interest in
spirituality particularly Tibetan
Buddhism and the time she and Uli spent
in Australia coming face to face with
Aboriginal culture which according to
Abramovich was an experience that proved
to be one of her most transformative
quote we chose this culture for many
reasons first it's nomadic for second
this culture doesn't have possessions
it's the culture where we always believe
in the idea of here and now which is
exactly what performance is about and
the third thing is that their entire
life is the ceremony and this piece
conjunction was really historically
important because it was the first time
ever that an aborigin and a Tibetan
llama physically ever met we decided to
construct a very large table covered
with 24 karat gold leaves and at that
table Uli and I are sitting in the
western position and opposite the table
is a Tibetan llama and a high degree
medicine man sitting in a cross-legged
position we are there sitting 4 days and
7 hours a day just sitting in a
meditative State end quote things did
not seem to improve in the relationship
between Marina and Uli however although
still deeply caring for each other they
were distancing further from each other
their passion was beginning to wear thin
and tensions only seemed to rise the
effect their success was having on each
of them was also drastically different
Uli never really cared that much for the
lifestyle of fame or for being in such a
spotlight being a lifelong Anarchist who
enjoyed Solitude he began rebelling
against what he saw as a growing
commercialization of their work Marina
however was growing weary of the poor
struggling artist life and welcomed
growing success sure enough by 1988 they
would make a spiritual journey that
would ultimately Mark the end of a
passionate and intense relationship an
art stunt which at the time had never
even been seen before named lovers the
great
wallwalk what would make this project so
Bitter Sweet would not just be the fact
that it might the end of a partnership
and relationship but the fact that it
was originally planned for many years
prior in 1983 when they proposed to be
the first people to walk the entire
distance of a Great Wall of China the
famous ancient Monument originally built
as a defense against Invaders from the
north and west of the country setting
off alone from opposite ends they
planned to meet right in the middle
where they intended to marry each other
the concept exhilarated them both the
idea was so Grand and even in their
early stages of planning the stunt
Marina especially knew that it would be
nothing short of historic the couple
visualized themselves walking alone
across the dramatic Landscapes of China
camping under the stars and romantically
concluding their journey through wedlock
they envisioned lovers as not just a
great journey to celebrate their love
and commitment for each other but also
an art to display in which they would be
both the performers and the
audience however it would be no simple
feat to
accomplish initially the authorities of
Beijing reportedly struggled to grasp
Bui Marin's motives for their Excursion
performance art especially of their
style and caliber was practically
unheard of in China to them it seemed
rather Preposterous to camp and walk
along the great historical monument for
a quote unquote art project not to
mention and get married on it regardless
after many years of push back they were
finally granted permission when they
both agreed to participate in a film of
their quote study of the Great War for
Chinese Central television but by then
the relationship had completely
dissolved in spite of this however they
decided to pursue their plans and go
ahead with a stunt changing the
narrative from one of marriage to one of
Separation The Long Walk began for them
on March 30th
1988 Abramovich set off westwards from
the dragon's head at the bodai sea an
extension of the Yellow Sea between
China and the Korean Peninsula dressed
in baggy red clothes she was according
to an informative article by the
guardian on the lovers stunt given the
nickname P Taj meaning big fat sister
mother as for Uli he began his journey
5,000 kilm west of Abramovich starting
his walk at the dragon's taale in the
GOI desert the walk proved to be
incredibly grueling with both artists
covering a distance of approximately
2,500 kilm over a period of 90 days
Abramovich walking most of her journey
through mountainous regions of China
came across many difficult and
inaccessible paths at one point on her
fourth day after slipping on some rocks
Abramovich and her guide found them
themselves nearly falling to their
deaths of course both artists would also
see amazing SS along the way such as
locals who had built homes and Stables
into sections of a winding wall who
would also assist them on their travels
and share stories and legends about the
land many of these crowds from the
surrounding towns and Villages
fascinated in the artists silently
followed them wherever they went in one
settlement villagers even gathered
around and watched Abramovich as she
slept finally on a stone bridge ulai and
Abramovich met at the center Marina
would quote on the experience as
follows that walk became a complete
personal drama Uli started from a GOI
desert and I from a Yellow Sea after
each of us walked 2,500 km we met in the
middle and said goodbye we needed a
certain form of ending after walking
this huge distance towards each other it
is very human it is in a way more
dramatic more like a film ending because
in the end you really are alone whatever
you do end
quote despite the Chinese press a group
of musicians and even a fireworks
display being prepared for the couple
upon the climax of their Journey there
would be no wedding ceremony they simply
took part in a press conference together
in Beijing then they returned separately
to Amsterdam and would not speak nor see
each other again for 22
[Music]
years although one big chapter of her
life had now ended with Uli another very
significant interest was now fueling
Marina which was finding her sense of
deep and personal spiritual uality
particularly within nature and the
unknown during her hike on the Great
Wall she spoke of how she felt that the
metals in the ground influenced her mood
and her state of being she also pondered
on the Chinese myths that she was told
by the locals in which the Great Wall
had been described as quote a dragon of
energy but even before lovers during the
1980s Abramovich had deeply immersed
herself in tibetan Budd ISM studying and
meditating at monasteries which would
later profoundly impact her
understanding of the Mind Body
Connection and the potential for
Transcendence through artistic
expression but rather than following one
spiritual path such as Buddhism
exclusively Marina spirituality is not
confined to any particular religious
Dogma rather it is a synthesis of
various influences that she has
encountered throughout her life her per
performances often serve as a form of
spiritual exploration pushing the
boundaries of the self and inviting the
audience to engage with their own
spiritual
Dimensions such as allowing the audience
to step into shoes made of crystals for
a 1991 art piece titled shoes for
departure in order to encourage a
certain State of Mind from the
participants quote I have instructions
for the public to take off your shoes
and with with naked feet put on the two
crystal shoes close your eyes don't move
and make your
departure I'm talking about a mental not
physical departure so the public can
enter certain states of Mind helped by
the material itself material is very
important for me I use crystals human
hair copper iron the materials already
have a certain energy End quotes
her Fascination in meditation taught in
Tibetan Buddhism as well as the profound
spiritual connection she developed for
the natural world would only continue to
reach New Heights throughout the 1990s
and Kickstart many new Concepts in fact
by 1995 when she was organizing her
piece titled cleaning the mirror this
would be directly inspired by Tibetan
death rights that prepare disciples to
become one with their own mortality
cleaning the miror is a series of
related performances and video
installations that explore themes of
mortality impermanence and the
purification of the Soul Abramovich sits
on a chair with a complete human
skeleton on her lap a bucket of soapy
water stands beside her for several
hours she meticulously scrubs the bones
with a floor brush cleaning away the
dirt and grime that has accumulated on
the bones over time the performance is
both pH physically and emotionally
demanding abramovich's face is often
stained with concentration and her
movements are slow and
deliberate the sound of a brush scraping
against the bones is Amplified creating
a sense of raw
intimacy as Abramovich cleans the
skeleton it gradually becomes whiter and
more luminous this could be seen as a
metaphor for the cleansing of a soul or
the process of facing one's own
mortality
the dirt that is removed from the bones
could represent the negative aspects of
the self such as fear anger ignorance
pride and
attachment what makes it more
interesting is that in cleaning the
skeleton Marina then becomes the one
covered in dirt symbolizing the
transference of these negative qualities
almost like a sacrifice for the benefit
of the
skeleton but in truth cleaning the
mirror can be interpreted in many many
different ways some viewers see it as a
meditation on death While others see it
as a call to live each moment to the
fullest for Abramovich though the
skeleton represents quote the last
mirror we will all face in a work
dominated by death and
transience this would not be the only
time skeletons would appear in her
performances though for example later on
in her career she would conceptualize
her type of self-portrait performance
titled nude with skeleton which evokes a
traditional exercise undertaken by
Tibetan Monks during which they slept
and meditated alongside the dead in
various states of Decay through this
practice they gain an understanding of a
process of death and
impermanence quote in different periods
of my life I made several Works using a
skeleton I construct the skeleton of my
own size and a lie posing the skel
Skeleton on my body by breathing slowly
the skeleton gets animated and moves
together with me the work is really
about facing your own mortality it's
about fear of pain and fear of dying
it's something that in our life we all
fear the most and again in my own work I
always like to confront these fears so
being close to the skeleton washing it
carrying it breathing through it looking
at it and confronting it it's the way to
deal with that fear end
[Laughter]
quote in keeping within the concept of
bones in the act of cleaning them
another one of Marina's most famous
works of the '90s would be her PE piece
titled balcan Barack first conducted in
1997 in Venice
Italy but before we can truly attempt to
comprehend the concept of this
particular piece we need to look at what
exactly inspired it or rather what
exactly it
memorializes between 1992 and
1995 a brutal and tragic conflict
unfolded in former Yugoslavia
specifically in the multiethnic Republic
of Bosnia and hurt cenia it was a
complex War fueled by ethnic tensions
and the breakup of Marina's former
country of Yugoslavia with devastating
consequences for the country and its
people following a referendum on Bosnian
Independence Bosnian serbs declared
their own State and an armed conflict
erupted Serb forces backed by the
Yugoslav People's Army laid Siege to
major cities like Saro and launched
defens es to capture territory the war
was marked by horrific acts of ethnic
cleansing where Serb forces
systematically expelled or killed
bosniacs and croats from areas they
claimed the sanit a massacre in
1995 where thousands of bosniac men and
boys were murdered became a chilling
symbol of the war's barbarity the
International Community initially
struggled to respond effectively to the
conflict however as the roties mounted
NATO air strikes against Ser positions
in 1995 helped turn the tide of the war
that same year the Dayton Accords were
signed bringing an official end to the
war the agreement established a complex
power sharing system for Bosnia and
hovenia divided into two entities the
Federation of Bosnia and hovenia
dominated by the bosniacs and the croats
and the Republic of cska
although the war ended the Bosnian War
left deep scars on the land and its
people over 100,000 lives were lost and
millions were displaced the war also
exposed the dangers of ethnic
nationalism and the importance of
international cooperation in preventing
such conflicts it's important to
remember the Bosnian War not only for
its tragic events but also as a stark
reminder of the fragility of peace and
the need for tolerance and understanding
in the diverse world that we live in
naturally Marina Abramovich would be one
of the many figureheads who would be
deeply affected by the
conflict quote when the war started in
Bosnia it was such a difficult time for
me I was not there i' had been living
for such a long time outside the country
and I remember so many artists
immediately reacting and making work and
protests on the horrors of that war and
I remember that I could not do anything
anything it was too close to me I went
to Belgrade and I interviewed my mother
my father and a man who caught rats for
35 years of his life there are a few
things happening in this installation
his positions so the hands of my father
my father with a pistol my mother's fist
showing empty hands and then with
crossed hands on her eyes and then it's
me first as a doctor telling the story
of the Rat catcher and then as a second
sexy dancer dancing to a Hungarian
chadash and in the meantime there's a
huge pile of bones which during the
entire performance I'm sitting and
washing it was summer in Venice very
very hot and after a few days already
worms started coming out of the bones
and the smell was
unbearable the whole idea that by
washing bones and trying to scrub the
blood is impossible you can't wash the
blood from your hand hands as you can't
wash for shame from the war but also it
was important to transcend it that can
be used this image for any War anywhere
in the world end quote this personally
for me is my favorite performance of
marinas I remember seeing a
retrospective of this at the Royal
Academy in London and just being
completely overwhelmed with emotions I
remember staring at the pile of bones
for a vast length of time whilst
listening to Marina's voice in the
background and let me tell you it hits
you deep like nothing you can
imagine and I felt it was true what she
said although directly manifested from
the horrors of the Bosnian war in truth
this piece encapsulates for Horrors
brutality and Insanity of practically
any War making it such a universally
powerful artwork ultimately many people
were proven to have felt the same way
this installation earned Abramovic for
Golden line award at the Venice Bay that
[Music]
year at the turn of a new millennium
Marina Abramovich at this stage appeared
to be revisiting a Grassroots concept of
hers that arguably served as one of the
main factors that shoved her career into
the Global Spotlight from the very
beginning which was an intimate and
close interaction between herself and
the
audience throughout the 2000s Marina
were conceptualized installations that
would deepen the connection between
herself and The Spectators in the wake
of the tragedy of 9/11 in 2001 she began
working on a piece titled the house with
an ocean view in the following year that
according to her served as a means to
immerse both herself and the audience in
a sort of purifying energy as explained
by her quote house with an ocean view
was for me an experiment when I came to
New York it was just after September
11th and I found New York had changed so
much I found New York and people living
there different more emotional more
vulnerable more
spiritual the idea of the work was an
experiment if I purify myself without
eating for 12 days any kind of food just
drinking pure water and being in the
present moment here and now in the three
units of the wall which represents my
house like the bathroom the living room
and the sleeping room where the ladder
coming down to the space is made of
knives so you can never leave that kind
of rigorous way of living and
purification would do something to
change the environment and to change the
attitude of people coming to see me if
they will just come and stay and forget
about the time I had in this period
people who came just for a few minutes
and then stayed for 3 hours 4 hours and
came the next day to stay even longer
without really understanding what's
happening but there's something like I
almost think that if you are in the
present moment
you are purified and that you can create
a kind of energy field that you can
charge on an atomic level of the space
in a certain way with the public and
feel and just be in the present time end
quote however one groundbreaking
durational piece that seemed to capture
the most intimacy between herself and
the audience as well as received the
most worldwide attention in recent years
was between March 14th to May 31st in
2010 at the Museum of Modern Art in New
York for 3 months she sat Motionless in
a chair inviting visitors to take the
opposite seat and silently engage with
her gaze titled the artist is present
the performance became a landmark event
in Contemporary Art sparking profound
emotional connections and raising
questions about human presence
vulnerability and connection
quote I have the empty chair so
everybody from the audience can come on
their free time and sit in front of me
and engage in this kind of Silence
experience of the here and now the
present moment so you can observe this
as kind of a stage for the experience or
you can really enter that space and take
active participation which actually
brings you much closer to the artist and
this presence and to your own experience
if you sit on this chair opposite me
it's extremely important to actually
find a very comfortable position and you
don't move just sit motionless and see
what happens if we connect our eyes and
I really think that is going to be
something quite special to go into this
unknown territory because of the energy
coming from the audience I have to be
the transmitter and receiver at the same
time that energy just goes through me
and to be ready for the next visitor and
the next one and the next one end
quote of course each encounter was
unique from person to person some simply
stared some smiled some would burst into
tears and one woman as seen in the
artist's present documentary would even
attempt to strip naked before sitting
opposite her but would subsequently be
escorted out by security for those who
did set opposite her though what's
fascinating to see is that Abramovich
would completely mirror the expressions
and emotions of her sitters for example
if someone would cry she too would start
crying sharing that exact same emotion
together in an incredible moment of
oness understandably though due to the
nature of the peace that sits could
choose the duration of time spent with
Marina with some sitting for just a few
minutes and others up to an entire day
this made tensions within the sometimes
endless queue of people difficult to
control at times almost being a call
back to the raw public energy captured
within her Rhythm Zero
Performance by the end of it Abramovich
sat across
1,545 Sitters in total including an
impressive list of celebrities such as
James Franco Lou Reed Alan Rickman Jami
MC cerk Jennifer Carpenter Orlando Bloom
and Bork however one of the earliest
sitters during the retrospective that
were gone a viral attention would be
none other than Uli
himself after many years of not seeing
each other ever since the Great Wall of
China Uli arrived unannounced at the
Museum he would sit down opposite Marina
as she looked up and opened her eyes to
see who was sitting opposite her the
moment captured between them both is
quite simply so powerful the
overwhelming Joy they both have for
seeing each other again is quite clear
to see and he can't help but feel moved
by this moment is worth remembering this
is a woman who went through Rhythm zero
despite being cut threatened abused and
nearly shot with a loaded gun but to see
ooli again was the moment that broke her
putting that into perspective really
does show the care that they still had
for each other back then it's just a
shame that Uli and Marina then got into
a messy royalty dispute no more than 5
years later like talk about a
Bittersweet relationship but in any case
the artist's presence remains a pivotal
moments in contemporary art history it
continues to be celebrated for its raw
emotional power it exploration of human
connection and it's challenged to the
conventions of artistic practice and one
that Marina claimed changed her life
entirely by the end of
[Music]
it
so I want to end this documentary by
talking about something that I know is
going to get a lot of mixed opinions
although at this point is fair to say
that Marina Abramovic was not one to shy
away from controversy or incredibly bold
ideas for her performances and in spite
of the boundaries she had already pushed
even earlier on in her career nothing
would be quite as divisive and
Incredibly outlandish as her provocative
performance that I've not yet mentioned
known as is Spirit cooking conceived in
1996 always got to say a best till last
day this particular project began with
an idea for a book a cookbook to be
precise that would be a collaborative
effort between her and printer publisher
Jacob Samuel in an Amsterdam
Studio as explained on the Museum of
Modern Art websites quote the artist
chose to make a cookbook writing a
series of aphrodiziac recipes that serve
as a vocative instructions for actions
or thoughts to allow the artist to
create the accompanying etches in a
manner consistent with a body oriented
practice Samuel prepared the plates with
a soft ground so she could scratch
directly on the surface with her
fingernails and encouraged her to work
with spit bite using her own saliva with
nitric acid to paint on the plate end
quote these quote unquote aphrodiziac
recipes were were essentially playfully
provocative poems by Abramovich inspired
by the popular folk belief that ghosts
feed off intangible things like light
sound and
emotions Jacob Samuel would comment on
the concept as follows in 1994 I
designed a portable Studio that I could
put in a crate and ship all over the
world so I could work with artists in
their own Studios I wanted to be able to
work with artists in their own
environment and see where that would
lead Marina was very open to whatever I
suggested in terms of technique but
right away I could see that she had a
very specific working process because
she's a performance artist and because
she uses her body for everything she was
a little uncomfortable drawing with a
pencil or an etching needle so I
suggested that we use soft ground and
that she draw with her fingernails and
occasionally she would use her
fingerprints she used bit bite aquatint
which he likeed to use because it
actually mixes the artist's saliva with
nitric acid so again is related to her
body this is exactly what I hoped would
happen by creating a portable Studio
that the artists would be so in tune
with their own environments that
translating it into another physical
context would be
irrelevant end quote so if it's just
supposed to be a fantasy cookbook
consisting of Make Believe recipes P
what exactly provokes so much
controversy compared to her other work
well if we take a look at a few examples
you'll quickly notice that some of these
are extremely bizarre and at times
straight up grotesque ranging from
eating nine red hot peppers whilst
facing a wall to and I'm not even
kidding here mixing fresh breast milk
with fresh sperm milk so to someone
completely unfamiliar with Marina's
outlandish creative personality it's
clear to see how this would be quite
shocking to the unsuspecting eye but the
project would not just end there in the
following year of
1997 Abramovich conducted a multimedia
Spirit cooking installation at a gallery
in Rome Italy where she would write
strange instructions and recipes in
Pig's blood all over the White Walls of
a showroom phrases included things like
spin around until you lose Consciousness
try to eat all the questions of the day
or saliva of your lover mixed with
morning Jew collected from eucalyptus
leaves would just be a few examples now
again given what we know of her work in
the past this is pretty shocking and
gruesome but relatively nothing out of
the ordinary when it comes to Abramovich
and the grand scheme of things with a
great deal of context removed I can
certainly see how this would look
barbaric and I guess I'll use that word
now satanic but the fact is if you
really want to find out why this
receives so much backlash I'm afraid
that will involve going down a
conspiracy theory rabbit hole and I hate
to break it to you but this is an art
Channel not a conspiracy theory Channel
there's also a lot of American politics
involved with the conspiracy as well and
well have you heard my accent American
politics is not exactly much strong suit
either so that's really as far as I
would go for this one I'm afraid
obviously people are completely entitled
to think what they will when it comes to
this particular work of her
like I said I can completely understand
why this would provoke such a reaction
I'm sure if she decided to put on more
nice sounding recipes like mix gumdrops
with daisies and feed off for happiness
and it was all written in Sugar iing I'm
pretty sure no one would even bat an
eyelid but if you're watching this video
expecting to hear what I personally
think I honestly have no other opinion
other than well yeah it's Marina
Abramovich it doesn't exactly surprise
me that she would work on something like
this do I share her beliefs or her
perspectives no whether or not she's a
Satanist or a witch whatever word you
want to use quite frankly that's none of
my business my focus on this channel is
on the artwork itself and whatever
proven reliable facts are available for
me to research from if you like
conspiracies that's totally fine but I
personally don't consider these things
to be reliable sources of information
I'm sorry if one day it comes out that
Marina is confirmed Beyond reasonable
doubt that she is more shall we say
morally questionable than we initially
thought then I guess we'll cross that
bridge when we get to it but for now all
I see Marina Abramovich as is an
extremely blunt raw outrageous
provocative and controversial
performance artist that not everybody is
going to love but here's the thing if we
lived in a world where every solitary
thing was objectively something to like
or hate just what kind of existence
would that be the world has never been
neat little boxes and categories and to
think otherwise is simply unrealistic
and that's the true beauty of art it's
one of the few things we have created as
a species that points out these kind of
complexities of life because art is
Limitless and doesn't have to have rules
I would absolutely be lying if I said I
like every project Abramovich has
conducted though I'll be honest I'm not
even sure I fully get her or agree with
her most of the time sometimes I think
she does go too far sometimes I do feel
like some of her performances are just
exploitative or self-deprecation on
display sometimes I think the way she
treats people is completely selfish and
is sensitive based on what I've read in
her book sometimes I think her art isn't
my idea of art at all but let me ask you
something whether you love her or
absolutely despise her can you honestly
say regardless of how you feel about her
that she hasn't had some kind of impact
on you in my eyes if that's not the
result of a successful artist then I
don't know what it is I think
performance art is one of those
anomalies within creativity that's
always going to get very split reactions
don't get me wrong I've seen some
terrible performance art and I too pick
and choose what constitutes real art
based on my own experiences and personal
tastes but that's exactly my point there
should never be a definitive answer
within art it's just like music Just
because you don't like a certain genre
of music that doesn't necessarily mean
the genre is definitively bad
or if I don't like a certain type of
food again just because I have different
preferences that doesn't mean that the
chef who cooked it is all of a sudden
bad at cooking I know it seems like an
obvious thing to say but I can't help
but feel when it comes to this certain
genre of Contemporary Art but people
tend to forget this side of things and
Marina Abramovich is an artist who I
don't think I'll ever truly be able to
fully rap my head around I find it
fascinating but even going to her
retrospective at the Royal Academy me
left me feeling both inspired and on the
other hand feeling like okay what the
[__] did I just witness but having said
that I can't think of another experience
in art quite like it so I absolutely
considered that noteworthy in conclusion
then despite the criticisms and
controversies the legacy of Marina
Abramovich remains undeniable she's
challenged her understanding of art
pushed the boundaries of human
performance and fostered profound
moments of connection between artists
and audience many times almost
effortlessly her work continues to
inspire awe and introspection drawing in
huge crowds of people worldwide sparking
huge debates of course all ensuring her
place as one of the most influential
artists presently alive today whether
For Better or For Worse she's been
relatively quiet with new ideas in
recent years mostly leaving it to a
hardworking new generation of
performance artists from her Arena
Abramovich Institute but it will be
interesting to see how both her most
loyal fans and her most passionate
haters will react to whatever she has
next in
[Music]
store thank you for watching this video
I hope you found this documentary
interesting before I go I'd like to take
a moment to share my end of video
segment called artist corner here I get
to show and discuss some artwork sent to
me by one of my lovely viewers
and today's featured artist is an
experimental photographer who goes by
the name of Rocco from Algeria in Africa
Rocco has been doing photography for 6
years and the journey into this medium
started when he asked himself one simple
question what is
originality this question came to
fruition when he noticed how he felt a
lot of artists in his country seem to be
lacking something fresh and new he tells
me he's always seen the same thing over
and over and he felt a strong need to do
something different with that he picked
up a camera and began capturing the
world around him in a very dark and
boldly surreal way however what makes
this photography so unique is that he
never aims to capture what he sees with
his camera but instead captures what he
feels inwardly as he explains quote I
just capture a feeling it's not about
the subject it's about how I feel most
of the time I take maybe hundreds of
photos but I find myself more interested
in the process and the finished project
end quote he tells me his main
inspiration is the people that he sees
on the streets and in his neighborhood
which he describes as quote an empty Zoo
often he is met with hostility when he
approaches people or places for photos
in his country despite asking for
consent and showing them his his
portfolio very often he will be accused
of using the photos for witchcraft
perhaps this is why a lot of expressions
of the people he photographs show a
sense of malice in his work because
according to Rocco in their eyes he's
doing something forbidden something that
he could even go to jail
for I find his style of Photography
extremely gripping he certainly has a
talent of capturing moments of dread and
uncertainty as well as of forboding
atmosphere but what I find particularly
clever is how he edits a lot of his
photographs to look almost like
handdrawn sketches which really stands
out as an aesthetically eye-catching
trademark in his work I F his
photography is certainly a mysterious
and fascinating journey to immerse
yourself in so if you want to see more
and of course show him some support
please head over to his Instagram page
via the link you see here now or in the
video description below by the way if
you're an artist photographer sculptor
performer or anything of the like and
fancy being featured on my channel it
would be great to meet you please send
me an email with examples of your work
and a little paragraph about yourself to
Blind dweller gmail.com or feel free to
give me a message on Instagram finally
as always a huge thank you to all of my
patrons and channel members here's a
special shout out to all of my top tier
donators Port Pera miles Z grape
vadiv Tyler Butler Harley Raven Eric Lam
marker Dave MC
molale the new onorm 24 equat Mo Ken B
Lee Flowers Calvin Kai
Aisa Carol H large fatty or big Chad and
Charlie San
cheesy that's all for me today see you
in the next video soon keep being
creative and bye for
now